interface-prototype/README.md, before:

# Interface Prototype

Web-based chat interface for the Berlin Open Data MCP server.

## Architecture

- **Frontend**: Svelte + Vite chat UI (port 5173)
- **Backend**: Node.js/Express + WebSocket server (port 3000)
- **MCP Server**: Berlin Open Data MCP (spawned by backend)
- **AI**: Claude API for conversation orchestration

## Setup

1. Install dependencies:
```bash
npm install
```

2. Configure your Claude API key:
```bash
cd backend
cp .env.example .env
# Edit .env and add your API key
```

3. Build the Berlin MCP server (if not already built):
```bash
cd ../berlin-open-data-mcp
npm install
npm run build
cd ../interface-prototype
```

## Development

Start both backend and frontend with a single command:

```bash
npm run dev
```

Open browser to http://localhost:5173

**Alternative:** Run backend and frontend separately:
```bash
npm run dev:backend  # Terminal 1
npm run dev:frontend # Terminal 2
```

## Production Build

```bash
npm run build
npm start
```

## Project Structure

- `backend/` - Express server, MCP client, Claude API integration
- `frontend/` - Svelte chat interface
- `docs/plans/` - Design spec and implementation plan

## How It Works

1. User types message in web UI
2. Frontend sends via WebSocket to backend
3. Backend forwards to Claude API with available MCP tools
4. Claude decides which tools to call
5. Backend executes tools via Berlin MCP server and streams tool activity to frontend
6. Backend sends results back to Claude
7. Claude generates final response
8. Backend streams response to frontend
9. Frontend displays response in chat with tool activity indicators

### Tool Activity Display

The interface shows real-time tool execution to give users visibility into the assistant's work. The display is structured in three parts:

**1. Intro text** (if provided by Claude)
- Natural language explanation of what Claude is about to do
- Example: "Let me search for traffic datasets..."
- Streams immediately when Claude responds

**2. Tool activity** (during and after execution)
- **During**: Active tools display with spinner: "Searching Berlin Datasets..."
- **After**: Individual collapsible badge for each tool: "🔧 Search Berlin Datasets"
- Multiple tools appear as stacked badges, showing the tool chain
- Click each badge to expand and see tool details:
  - Input arguments (JSON)
  - Results or error messages

**3. Final response**
- Claude's response after analyzing tool results
- Example: "I found 5 datasets about traffic in Berlin..."

**Implementation:**
- Backend extracts intro text from Claude's response (if present) and streams it immediately
- Backend emits `tool_call_start` when tool execution begins
- Backend emits `tool_call_complete` when tool finishes (with result or error)
- Backend streams final response after tools complete
- Frontend displays intro → tools → response in order
- See `/backend/src/types.ts` for WebSocket message types

## Testing

```bash
npm test
```

## Environment Variables

- `ANTHROPIC_API_KEY` - Required. Your Claude API key
- `PORT` - Optional. Backend port (default: 3000)
- `BERLIN_MCP_PATH` - Optional. Path to Berlin MCP server

Commit message:

Add file upload feature for data analysis
- Support CSV, JSON, GeoJSON, and Excel files (10 MB limit)
- Add paperclip button to input area with file chip display
- Parse and cache uploaded files server-side
- Files available to code executor for analysis
- Update README with file upload documentation

interface-prototype/README.md, after:

# Interface Prototype

Web-based chat interface for the Berlin Open Data MCP server.

## Architecture

- **Frontend**: Svelte + Vite chat UI (port 5173)
- **Backend**: Node.js/Express + WebSocket server (port 3000)
- **MCP Server**: Berlin Open Data MCP (spawned by backend)
- **AI**: Claude API for conversation orchestration

## Setup

1. Install dependencies:
```bash
npm install
```

2. Configure your Claude API key:
```bash
cd backend
cp .env.example .env
# Edit .env and add your API key
```

3. Build the Berlin MCP server (if not already built):
```bash
cd ../berlin-open-data-mcp
npm install
npm run build
cd ../interface-prototype
```

## Development

Start both backend and frontend with a single command:

```bash
npm run dev
```

Open browser to http://localhost:5173

**Alternative:** Run backend and frontend separately:
```bash
npm run dev:backend  # Terminal 1
npm run dev:frontend # Terminal 2
```

## Production Build

```bash
npm run build
npm start
```

## Project Structure

- `backend/` - Express server, MCP client, Claude API integration
- `frontend/` - Svelte chat interface
- `docs/plans/` - Design spec and implementation plan

## How It Works

1. User types message in web UI
2. Frontend sends via WebSocket to backend
3. Backend forwards to Claude API with available MCP tools
4. Claude decides which tools to call
5. Backend executes tools via Berlin MCP server and streams tool activity to frontend
6. Backend sends results back to Claude
7. Claude generates final response
8. Backend streams response to frontend
9. Frontend displays response in chat with tool activity indicators

### Tool Activity Display

The interface shows real-time tool execution to give users visibility into the assistant's work. The display is structured in three parts:

**1. Intro text** (if provided by Claude)
- Natural language explanation of what Claude is about to do
- Example: "Let me search for traffic datasets..."
- Streams immediately when Claude responds

**2. Tool activity** (during and after execution)
- **During**: Active tools display with spinner: "Searching Berlin Datasets..."
- **After**: Individual collapsible badge for each tool: "🔧 Search Berlin Datasets"
- Multiple tools appear as stacked badges, showing the tool chain
- Click each badge to expand and see tool details:
  - Input arguments (JSON)
  - Results or error messages

**3. Final response**
- Claude's response after analyzing tool results
- Example: "I found 5 datasets about traffic in Berlin..."

**Implementation:**
- Backend extracts intro text from Claude's response (if present) and streams it immediately
- Backend emits `tool_call_start` when tool execution begins
- Backend emits `tool_call_complete` when tool finishes (with result or error)
- Backend streams final response after tools complete
- Frontend displays intro → tools → response in order
- See `/backend/src/types.ts` for WebSocket message types

## File Upload

Users can upload data files for analysis, similar to Claude Desktop.

**Supported formats:**
- CSV (`.csv`)
- JSON (`.json`)
- GeoJSON (`.geojson`)
- Excel (`.xlsx`, `.xls`)

**Size limit:** 10 MB

**How it works:**
1. Click the paperclip icon next to the input field
2. Select a file (or remove it by clicking ×)
3. Optionally add a message describing what you want to analyze
4. Send - the file is parsed and cached server-side
5. Claude can analyze the data using the `execute_code` tool

**Technical details:**
- Files are base64-encoded and sent via WebSocket
- Backend parses files and caches as `upload-{timestamp}-{id}`
- Parsed data is available to the sandboxed JavaScript executor
- Data persists for the session (lost on page refresh)

## Testing

```bash
npm test
```

## Environment Variables

- `ANTHROPIC_API_KEY` - Required. Your Claude API key
- `PORT` - Optional. Backend port (default: 3000)
- `BERLIN_MCP_PATH` - Optional. Path to Berlin MCP server
